docs/imviz/plugins.rst, before:

.. _imviz_plugins:

*********************
Data Analysis Plugins
*********************

The Imviz data analysis plugins are meant to aid quick-look analysis
of 2D image data. All plugins are accessed via the :guilabel:`plugin`
icon in the upper right corner of the Imviz application.

.. image:: ../img/plugins.jpg
    :alt: Imviz Plugins
    :width: 200px

.. _imviz_metadata-viewer:

Metadata Viewer
===============

This plugin allows viewing of any metadata associated with the selected data.

If the data is loaded from multi-extension FITS that contains a primary header,
you will also see a :guilabel:`Show primary header` toggle, when enabled, would
display just the primary header metadata.

.. _imviz-plot-options:

Plot Options
============

This plugin gives access to per-viewer and per-layer plotting options.

.. seealso::

    :ref:`Display Settings <imviz-display-settings>`
        Documentation on various display settings in the Jdaviz viewers.

.. _imviz-subset-plugin:

Subset Tools
============

This plugin allows you to select an existing subset to modify, or to select
:guilabel:`Create new` to create a new subset by selecting and using the region selector
in the spectrum viewer toolbar. You can also choose the operation that will be
applied by the selector tool. Note that these are synched with the subset tools
in the app-level toolbar. It does not show static regions loaded
via the API unless an interactive region is drawn after.

If an existing subset is selected, the parameters of the subset will also be
shown. Note that while parameters for compound regions (e.g., a subset with
multiple disjoint regions) are displayed, the logical operations joining them
(``OR``, ``AND``, etc.) are not shown.

For a simple subset, you can edit its parameters by changing the values
in the corresponding editable text fields. Once you have entered the new
value(s), click :guilabel:`Update` to apply. You should see the subset
parameters and shape both update concurrently.

.. note:: Angle is currently uneditable.

.. _imviz-link-control:

Link Control
============

This plugin is used to re-link images by pixels or WCS using
:func:`~jdaviz.configs.imviz.helper.link_image_data`.
All images are automatically linked by pixels on load but you can use
it to re-link by pixels or WCS as needed. Once you have set your
options, click :guilabel:`LINK` to perform the linking.

For WCS linking, the "fast approximation" option uses an affine transform
to represent the offset between images, if possible. It is much more
performant at the cost of accuracy but should be accurate to within a pixel
for most cases. If approximation fails, WCS linking still automatically
falls back to full transformation.

For more details on linking, see :ref:`dev_glue_linking`.

From the API
------------

From the API within the Jupyter notebook (if linking by WCS)::

    imviz.link_data(link_type='wcs')

.. _imviz-compass:

Compass
=======

For an image with a valid WCS, the compass would show directions to North (N)
and East (E) for ICRS sky coordinates. It also shows the currently displayed
data label, the X and Y directions, and the zoom box.

When you have multiple viewers created in Imviz, use the Viewer dropdown menu
to change the active viewer that it tracks.

.. _rotate-image-simple:

Simple Image Rotation
=====================

.. warning::

    Distortion is ignored, so using this plugin on distorted data is
    not recommended.

.. note::

    Zoom box in :ref:`imviz-compass` will not show when rotation mode is on.

This plugins rotates image(s) by the given angle.
You can select viewer but that option only shows when applicable.
You can enter the desired rotation angle in degrees counter-clockwise.
Click on the :guilabel:`ROTATE` button to finalize.

.. _line-profile-xy:

Line Profiles
=============

This plugin plots line profiles across X and Y for the pixel under cursor
when ``l`` key is pressed on the image viewer. You can also manually type in the
values of X and Y, and then press the :guilabel:`PLOT` button.
The top visible image, the same one displayed under :ref:`imviz-compass`,
will be used for these plots.

This plugin only considers pixel locations, not sky coordinates.

.. _aper-phot-simple:

Simple Aperture Photometry
==========================

.. warning::

    Results for dithered data linked by WCS might be inaccurate unless the selected
    data is the reference data. See https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-astronomy/issues/52
    for more details.

This plugin performs simple aperture photometry
and plots a radial profile for one object within
an interactively selected region. A typical workflow is as follows:

1. Load image(s) in Imviz (see :ref:`imviz-import-data`).
2. Draw a region over the object of interest (see :ref:`imviz_defining_spatial_regions`).
3. Select the desired image using the :guilabel:`Data` dropdown menu.
4. Select the desired region using the :guilabel:`Subset` dropdown menu.
5. If you want to subtract background before performing photometry,
   you have the following 3 options. Otherwise if your image is already
   background subtracted, choose "Manual" and leave the background set at 0:

  * Manual: Enter the background value in the :guilabel:`Background value` field.
    This value must be in the same unit as display data, if applicable.
  * Annulus: Enter its inner radius and width in the :guilabel:`Annulus inner radius`
    and :guilabel:`Annulus width`, respectively. Median of the pixels within
    the annulus region will be used but the annulus shape will not be shown on display.
  * Subset: Define a region for background calculation (median) using Subset draw tool
    and select that region using the :guilabel:`Background` dropdown menu.

6. For some JWST and HST images, pixel area in arcsec squared is automatically
   populated in the :guilabel:`Pixel area` field from image metadata. If it does
   not auto-populate for you, you can manually enter a value but it must be in the
   unit of arcsec squared. This field is only used if per steradian is detected
   in display data unit. Otherwise, it is only informational.
   If this field is not applicable for you, leave it at 0.
   **This field resets every time Data selection changes if auto-population not possible.**
7. If you also want photometry result in the unit of counts, you can enter a
   conversion factor in the :guilabel:`Counts conversion factor` field. The value
   must be in the unit of display data unit per counts. This is used to convert linear
   flux unit (e.g., MJy/sr) to counts. This field is only used if data has a valid unit.
   If this field is not applicable for you, leave it at 0.
   **This field resets every time Data selection changes.**
8. If you also want photometry result in magnitude unit, you can enter a flux
   scaling factor in the :guilabel:`Flux scaling` field.
   :guilabel:`Flux scaling` is populated for JWST images
   if MJy/sr data unit is detected and pixel area is given to factor out the per-steradian unit.
   The value used, if this is the case, is the scaling to convert MJy to AB magnitude.
   Otherwise, the value must be in the
   same unit as display data unit. A magnitude is then calculated using
   ``-2.5 * log(flux / flux_scaling)``. This calculation only makes sense if your
   display data unit is already in linear flux unit. Setting this to 1 is equivalent
   to not applying any scaling. This field is only used if data has a valid unit.
   If this field is not applicable for you, leave it at 0.
   **This field resets every time Data selection changes.**
9. Select the desired radial profile plot type using the :guilabel:`Plot Type` dropdown menu:

  * Curve of Growth: :attr:`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats.sum` (sum of flux in the aperture)
    across radii from center out to the edge of the aperture. This is calculated in the same
    way as the final aperture sum in the output table, which is explained farther down on
    this page.
  * Radial Profile: Binned average as a function of radius from the center of the region.
  * Radial Profile (Raw): Raw image data points as a function of radius from the center of the region.
    Caution: having too many data points may cause performance issues with this feature. 
    The exact limitations depend on your hardware.

10. Toggle :guilabel:`Fit Gaussian` on to fit a `~astropy.modeling.functional_models.Gaussian1D`
    model to the radial profile data. This is disabled for curve-of-growth.
11. Once all inputs are populated correctly, click on the :guilabel:`CALCULATE`
    button to perform simple aperture photometry.

.. note::

    Masking and weights by uncertainty are currently not supported.
    However, if NaN exists in data, it will be treated as 0.

When calculation is complete, a plot would show the radial profile
of the background subtracted data and the photometry and model fitting (if requested)
results are displayed under the :guilabel:`CALCULATE` button.

.. figure:: img/imviz_radial_profile.png
    :alt: Imviz radial profile plot.

    Radial profile.

.. figure:: img/imviz_radial_profile_raw.png
    :alt: Imviz radial profile plot (raw).

    Radial profile (raw).

.. seealso::

    :ref:`Export Photometry <imviz_export_photomtery>`
        Documentation on exporting photometry results.

.. _imviz-catalogs:

Catalog Search
==============

This plugin queries a catalog around the zoom window of the active image, marks the sources from the results of the query, and
provides the number of sources found. After zooming into a specific region of the image, the query uses the center
point of the region with a radius determined by the farthest edge point of the region. Clicking on :guilabel:`CLEAR`
will remove all markers on the active viewer.

To select which catalog you would like to use for the search, please pick one of the available options from the
catalog dropdown menu.

.. note::

    This plugin is still under active development. As a result, the search only uses the SDSS DR17 catalog
    and works best when you only have a single image loaded in a viewer.

If you have multiple viewers open, you will see another dropdown menu to select the active
viewer.

Additionally, the query starts anew every time :guilabel:`SEARCH` is clicked, so previous results and marks
are not stored. To save the current result before submitting a new query, you can save the table to a variable::

    results = imviz.get_catalog_source_results()

.. note::

    The table returned from the API above may cover more sources than shown in the currently zoomed-in
    portion of the image. Additional steps will be needed to filter out these points, if necessary.

.. _imviz-export-plot:

Export Plot
===========

This plugin allows exporting the plot in a given viewer to a PNG or SVG file.

Commit message:

Use rotation attribute like astrofrog said.
Looks like angle is clockwise again, not counter-clockwise.

docs/imviz/plugins.rst, after:

.. _imviz_plugins:

*********************
Data Analysis Plugins
*********************

The Imviz data analysis plugins are meant to aid quick-look analysis
of 2D image data. All plugins are accessed via the :guilabel:`plugin`
icon in the upper right corner of the Imviz application.

.. image:: ../img/plugins.jpg
    :alt: Imviz Plugins
    :width: 200px

.. _imviz_metadata-viewer:

Metadata Viewer
===============

This plugin allows viewing of any metadata associated with the selected data.

If the data is loaded from multi-extension FITS that contains a primary header,
you will also see a :guilabel:`Show primary header` toggle, when enabled, would
display just the primary header metadata.

.. _imviz-plot-options:

Plot Options
============

This plugin gives access to per-viewer and per-layer plotting options.

.. seealso::

    :ref:`Display Settings <imviz-display-settings>`
        Documentation on various display settings in the Jdaviz viewers.

.. _imviz-subset-plugin:

Subset Tools
============

This plugin allows you to select an existing subset to modify, or to select
:guilabel:`Create new` to create a new subset by selecting and using the region selector
in the spectrum viewer toolbar. You can also choose the operation that will be
applied by the selector tool. Note that these are synched with the subset tools
in the app-level toolbar. It does not show static regions loaded
via the API unless an interactive region is drawn after.

If an existing subset is selected, the parameters of the subset will also be
shown. Note that while parameters for compound regions (e.g., a subset with
multiple disjoint regions) are displayed, the logical operations joining them
(``OR``, ``AND``, etc.) are not shown.

For a simple subset, you can edit its parameters by changing the values
in the corresponding editable text fields. Once you have entered the new
value(s), click :guilabel:`Update` to apply. You should see the subset
parameters and shape both update concurrently.

.. note:: Angle is currently uneditable.

.. _imviz-link-control:

Link Control
============

This plugin is used to re-link images by pixels or WCS using
:func:`~jdaviz.configs.imviz.helper.link_image_data`.
All images are automatically linked by pixels on load but you can use
it to re-link by pixels or WCS as needed. Once you have set your
options, click :guilabel:`LINK` to perform the linking.

For WCS linking, the "fast approximation" option uses an affine transform
to represent the offset between images, if possible. It is much more
performant at the cost of accuracy but should be accurate to within a pixel
for most cases. If approximation fails, WCS linking still automatically
falls back to full transformation.

For more details on linking, see :ref:`dev_glue_linking`.

From the API
------------

From the API within the Jupyter notebook (if linking by WCS)::

    imviz.link_data(link_type='wcs')

.. _imviz-compass:

Compass
=======

For an image with a valid WCS, the compass would show directions to North (N)
and East (E) for ICRS sky coordinates. It also shows the currently displayed
data label, the X and Y directions, and the zoom box.

When you have multiple viewers created in Imviz, use the Viewer dropdown menu
to change the active viewer that it tracks.

.. _rotate-image-simple:

Simple Image Rotation
=====================

.. warning::

    Distortion is ignored, so using this plugin on distorted data is
    not recommended.

.. note::

    Zoom box in :ref:`imviz-compass` will not show when rotation mode is on.

This plugins rotates image(s) by the given angle.
You can select viewer but that option only shows when applicable.
You can enter the desired rotation angle in degrees clockwise.
This angle is absolute, i.e., relative to original image orientation, not the current rotation.
Click on the :guilabel:`ROTATE` button to finalize.

.. _line-profile-xy:

Line Profiles
=============

This plugin plots line profiles across X and Y for the pixel under cursor
when ``l`` key is pressed on the image viewer. You can also manually type in the
values of X and Y, and then press the :guilabel:`PLOT` button.
The top visible image, the same one displayed under :ref:`imviz-compass`,
will be used for these plots.

This plugin only considers pixel locations, not sky coordinates.

.. _aper-phot-simple:

Simple Aperture Photometry
==========================

.. warning::

    Results for dithered data linked by WCS might be inaccurate unless the selected
    data is the reference data. See https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-astronomy/issues/52
    for more details.

This plugin performs simple aperture photometry
and plots a radial profile for one object within
an interactively selected region. A typical workflow is as follows:

1. Load image(s) in Imviz (see :ref:`imviz-import-data`).
2. Draw a region over the object of interest (see :ref:`imviz_defining_spatial_regions`).
3. Select the desired image using the :guilabel:`Data` dropdown menu.
4. Select the desired region using the :guilabel:`Subset` dropdown menu.
5. If you want to subtract background before performing photometry,
   you have the following 3 options. Otherwise if your image is already
   background subtracted, choose "Manual" and leave the background set at 0:

  * Manual: Enter the background value in the :guilabel:`Background value` field.
    This value must be in the same unit as display data, if applicable.
  * Annulus: Enter its inner radius and width in the :guilabel:`Annulus inner radius`
    and :guilabel:`Annulus width`, respectively. Median of the pixels within
    the annulus region will be used but the annulus shape will not be shown on display.
  * Subset: Define a region for background calculation (median) using Subset draw tool
    and select that region using the :guilabel:`Background` dropdown menu.

6. For some JWST and HST images, pixel area in arcsec squared is automatically
   populated in the :guilabel:`Pixel area` field from image metadata. If it does
   not auto-populate for you, you can manually enter a value but it must be in the
   unit of arcsec squared. This field is only used if per steradian is detected
   in display data unit. Otherwise, it is only informational.
   If this field is not applicable for you, leave it at 0.
   **This field resets every time Data selection changes if auto-population not possible.**
7. If you also want photometry result in the unit of counts, you can enter a
   conversion factor in the :guilabel:`Counts conversion factor` field. The value
   must be in the unit of display data unit per counts. This is used to convert linear
   flux unit (e.g., MJy/sr) to counts. This field is only used if data has a valid unit.
   If this field is not applicable for you, leave it at 0.
   **This field resets every time Data selection changes.**
8. If you also want photometry result in magnitude unit, you can enter a flux
   scaling factor in the :guilabel:`Flux scaling` field.
   :guilabel:`Flux scaling` is populated for JWST images
   if MJy/sr data unit is detected and pixel area is given to factor out the per-steradian unit.
   The value used, if this is the case, is the scaling to convert MJy to AB magnitude.
   Otherwise, the value must be in the
   same unit as display data unit. A magnitude is then calculated using
   ``-2.5 * log(flux / flux_scaling)``. This calculation only makes sense if your
   display data unit is already in linear flux unit. Setting this to 1 is equivalent
   to not applying any scaling. This field is only used if data has a valid unit.
   If this field is not applicable for you, leave it at 0.
   **This field resets every time Data selection changes.**
9. Select the desired radial profile plot type using the :guilabel:`Plot Type` dropdown menu:

  * Curve of Growth: :attr:`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats.sum` (sum of flux in the aperture)
    across radii from center out to the edge of the aperture. This is calculated in the same
    way as the final aperture sum in the output table, which is explained farther down on
    this page.
  * Radial Profile: Binned average as a function of radius from the center of the region.
  * Radial Profile (Raw): Raw image data points as a function of radius from the center of the region.
    Caution: having too many data points may cause performance issues with this feature. 
    The exact limitations depend on your hardware.

10. Toggle :guilabel:`Fit Gaussian` on to fit a `~astropy.modeling.functional_models.Gaussian1D`
    model to the radial profile data. This is disabled for curve-of-growth.
11. Once all inputs are populated correctly, click on the :guilabel:`CALCULATE`
    button to perform simple aperture photometry.

.. note::

    Masking and weights by uncertainty are currently not supported.
    However, if NaN exists in data, it will be treated as 0.

When calculation is complete, a plot would show the radial profile
of the background subtracted data and the photometry and model fitting (if requested)
results are displayed under the :guilabel:`CALCULATE` button.

.. figure:: img/imviz_radial_profile.png
    :alt: Imviz radial profile plot.

    Radial profile.

.. figure:: img/imviz_radial_profile_raw.png
    :alt: Imviz radial profile plot (raw).

    Radial profile (raw).

.. seealso::

    :ref:`Export Photometry <imviz_export_photomtery>`
        Documentation on exporting photometry results.

.. _imviz-catalogs:

Catalog Search
==============

This plugin queries a catalog around the zoom window of the active image, marks the sources from the results of the query, and
provides the number of sources found. After zooming into a specific region of the image, the query uses the center
point of the region with a radius determined by the farthest edge point of the region. Clicking on :guilabel:`CLEAR`
will remove all markers on the active viewer.

To select which catalog you would like to use for the search, please pick one of the available options from the
catalog dropdown menu.

.. note::

    This plugin is still under active development. As a result, the search only uses the SDSS DR17 catalog
    and works best when you only have a single image loaded in a viewer.

If you have multiple viewers open, you will see another dropdown menu to select the active
viewer.

Additionally, the query starts anew every time :guilabel:`SEARCH` is clicked, so previous results and marks
are not stored. To save the current result before submitting a new query, you can save the table to a variable::

    results = imviz.get_catalog_source_results()

.. note::

    The table returned from the API above may cover more sources than shown in the currently zoomed-in
    portion of the image. Additional steps will be needed to filter out these points, if necessary.

.. _imviz-export-plot:

Export Plot
===========

This plugin allows exporting the plot in a given viewer to a PNG or SVG file.
